---
layout: post
title:  "Enums and refactoring"
date:   2024-02-22-00:00:00 +0000
categories: python
redirect_from:
- python/2024/02/22/enums/
---

Enumerations are types that take a set of pre-defined options, called _members_ which are also assigned values. Usually, enumerations members are, as the name implies, simply mapped to a integer values, but any arbitrary value might work. Here's an example of an enumeration in Python for colors:

```python
from enum import Enum

class Color(Enum):
    RED = 0
    GREEN = 1
    BLUE = 2

```

Creating this Enum allows us to use `Color.RED` in code as a symbolic value, instead of using a string or integer. This post goes over some of the intricacies of using enumerations in python, and why you would want to use them over raw values. The Python docs have [a really nice tutorial about Enum](https://docs.python.org/3/library/enum.html). This blog post will have some overlap, but will mostly focus on why, when, and where you would like to use them.

The TLDR version of this blog: enumerations are a great way to cure your codebase of what is called ["stringly typing"](https://wiki.c2.com/?StringlyTyped). That's it!

If you are still interested, let's use a simple example from a Machine Learning workflow. In Machine Learning, we usually train models on some set of data, which we call the train set, and fine-tune our training procedure (e.g., the model hyperparameters) on another set, which is called the validation set. After training, we produce accuracy scores for held out data, commonly called the test set.

Let's think of a simple function that gives us the correct split for a given dataset. We're pretending to use mongoDB.

```python
def get_data(dataset_id: str, dataset_type: str) -> list[dict]:
    db_client = get_client()
    records = db_client.find({"dataset_id": dataset_id, "dataset_split": dataset_type})

    return list(records)

```

So far so good, looks nice! However, when maintaining this code, we will come to an ugly realization: it is unclear which values `dataset_type` can take. Are we using `TRAIN` or `train`? `validation` or `val`, or even `dev`? Is there another option, like `unassigned` or `not_used`? This becomes all the more problematic if you consider that often the `dataset_type` is passed in via a command line argument, or via an API, so you can't actually go through the code to find all possible values for `dataset_type`. Often, the most reliable way to find out is to do a Database call, which is 👎👎👎.

Enter enumerations! Let's define an `Enum` for our `dataset_type`.

```python
from enum import Enum

class DatasetType(Enum):
    TRAIN = "train"
    VALIDATION = "validation"
    TEST = "test"

```

(Note that we could also have used `auto` here, in combination with a `StrEnum`, but only on Python >= 3.11.)
Now, our function above reduces to:

```python
def get_data(dataset_id: str, dataset_type: DatasetType) -> list[dict]:
    db_client = get_client()
    records = db_client.find({"dataset_id": dataset_id, "dataset_split": dataset_type.value})

    return list(records)

```

Note the call to `.value` in the query itself. This is because we don't want to pass the Enum member itself, but the string value of that member. The database has no knowledge of the enumeration, so this query might fail if you don't use `.value`.

As you can see, a programmer that has no knowledge of the code base will have a much easier time to discover the meaning of the argument called `dataset_type`, and can also easily determine the values this type can take. This makes refactors and changes in the code much less error-prone, and much easier.

# `name` and `value`

`Enum` members have two properties, a `name` and `value`. The `name` of a member is always unique, and always has the type `str`, while the `value` can have any type, and and also needs to be unique. Although uniqueness can be enforced using the [`unique` decorator](https://docs.python.org/3/library/enum.html#enum.unique), any duplicate values get removed on Enum creation anyway, which is weird to me. The following showcases what I mean:

```python
from enum import Enum

class Color(Enum):
    RED = 0
    BLUE = 0
    GREEN = 1

len(Color)
# 2!
print(list(Color))
# [<Color.RED: 0>, <Color.GREEN: 1>]
```

I don't think I have ever used `name` for anything, and always use the members directly in functions. I tend to only coerce members to their `value` at the last possible moment, i.e., when interfacing with another library, a function that has no knowledge of the enumeration, or when returning API responses.

Also useful to know: you can get enumeration members by their value by calling the enumeration directly, and by their name by indexing them as a string. Using the Color enumeration defined above:

```
Color(0)
# <Color.RED: 0>
Color["RED"]
# <Color.RED: 0>

```

# Advantages of using enums

Enumerations allow you to statically type check you code really nicely using `mypy`. It thus gives quite strong, or a lot stronger, correctness guarantees compared to using string or integer values directly.

An additional advantage is that it is very difficult to assign the wrong value to the wrong argument when calling functions. For example, given a function that takes two string values, it is possible to mix them up:

```python
get_data(dataset_type: str,
         dataset_split: str)
```

These, and other points, have also been made by the excellent ["rusty python"](https://kobzol.github.io/rust/python/2023/05/20/writing-python-like-its-rust.html) blog post: by assigning tiny types to your functions, it becomes much more difficult to use them incorrectly, and much easier for programmers to reason about them, as follows:

```python
get_data(dataset_type: DatasetType,
         dataset_split: DatasetSplit)
```

Another advantage is that using enumerations (or `NewType`s, for that matter), force you to not create circular dependencies in your code. By using strings directly, it is possible, and very easy, in fact, to pass these strings around, up and down your program, and then pass it back out again. If you ever want to replace this string by an enumeration, you will be burned, and will have to probably refactor extensively.

A final advantage, and counterpoint to the above, is that enumerations don't force you to use them everywhere. Once a circular dependency is uncovered, you can just start using whatever `.value` you have, and start passing that around. It's not pretty, very ugly, in fact, but it greatly eases the burned of refactors. 

So, that was it for the first part of enumerations, next time we'll discuss more complicated enumerations.