---
layout: post
title:  "Enums with superclasses"
date:   2024-02-12-00:00:00 +0000
categories: python
---

In the previous post, I wrote about enumerations, and how they can be really handy when refactoring code. One thing I didn't touch upon in that post is typed enumerations, which are enumerations that also have a type. As we saw in the previous post, an enumeration member is an association between a `name` and a `value`. But this means we need to call `.value` to get the actual value of an enumeration member. This can lead to overly verbose code. Take a logger for example:

```python
from enum import Enum

class LoggingLevel(Enum):
    INFO = 10
    WARNING = 20
    DEBUG = 30
    ERROR = 40
```

These levels obviously represent an ordinal variable: if we set the logging level to 20 or higher, we will see messages with the type `WARNING` and with the type `INFO`. Implementing this, however, can be quite cumbersome, because we will keep having to refer to the `.value` of each level.

A solution to this problem is to also assign an additional `type` as a superclass to the `Enum`:

```python
from enum import Enum

class LoggingLevel(int, Enum):
    INFO = 10
    WARNING = 20
    DEBUG = 30
    ERROR = 40
```

By adding `int` as a type, we can directly use the logging levels as integers. This allows us to do the following:

```python
desired_level = 33

[level for level in LoggingLevel if level <= desired_level]
```

Similarly, it also allows us to directly sort enumerations by value, print them as integers, add them to other integers, and anything you would be able to do with a regular `int`. Note that this can be very useful for strings as well. The Python standard library has standard types for string enums ([StrEnum](https://docs.python.org/3/library/enum.html#enum.StrEnum)) and int enums ([IntEnum](https://docs.python.org/3/library/enum.html#enum.IntEnum)) (although only for Python >= 3.11.)

# How this works

First, note that [there can only be one](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highlander_(film)) extra superclass, and the superclass always needs to come before the `Enum` type ("before" here is ambiguous, as the method resolution order of superclasses is from back to front. I mean to say that the superclass that defines your values needs to be put _before_ `Enum` within the brackets.) The inner workings of this are quite complicated, but let's dive in.

First, note that the subtype you assign to your enumeration of choice is used to _convert_ the actual values you write in your code, and does not constrain you to actually specify values of that specific type. That is, you can write this:

```python
from enum import Enum

class MyEnum(str, Enum):
    CAT = 1
    DOG = "dog"
    CLOWN = object()

```

The values assigned to these enum members are all passed to the initializer of the superclass your enumeration derives from. As we can see, they have all become strings:

```python
[x.value for x in MyEnum]
# ['1', 'dog', '<object object at 0x1022e7d00>']
```

Thus, creating an enumeration with an additional superclass does not mean that the values you pass in are _required_ to be of that superclass, they just need to be able to be processed by the initializer of that type.

Note that collisions between values after conversion will remove duplicates, because values need to be unique, so please be careful:

```python
from enum import Enum

class MyEnum(int, Enum):
    CAT = 1
    DOG = 1.0
    CLOWN = 0.333

print(list(MyEnum))
# [<MyEnum.cat: 1>, <MyEnum.clown: 0>] 
# NOTE: oh my 🙀🙀🙀
```

You can improve the situation somewhat by using the `@unique` decorator.

```python
from enum import Enum, unique

@unique
class MyEnum(int, Enum):
    CAT = 1
    DOG = 1.0
    CLOWN = 0.333

# Fails with "ValueError: duplicate values found in <enum 'MyEnum'>: dog -> cat"
```

# Enums with custom types

You can also use enumerations with custom types, i.e., types which you have defined yourself. This is where things get really difficult! One use case in which I again, really like to use enums, is by storing multiple sources of information in a single value.

For example, consider an [OpenAI](https://openai.com/) (I am not sure why I am linking to OpenAI, but ok) model specification:

```python
from enum import Enum

class OpenAIModel(Enum):
    GPT35 = "gpt-3.5-turbo"
    GPT4 = "gpt-4"

```

This is nice, and works! It allows us to map symbolic model enums to identifiers used by OpenAI in its own API. However, these models also have other characteristics: they have specific tokenizers, and have a maximum context length, in tokens. For example, this length is 8192 for `gpt-4`, and 16000 for `gpt-3.5-turbo` (see [here](https://openai.com/pricing)). What happens often, in practice, is that we create additional specs somewhere else that map from the enumeration members to these secondary characteristics:

```python
model_lengths: dict[OpenAIModel, int] = {OpenAIModel.GPT35: 16000, OpenAIModel.GPT4: 8192}
model_tokenizer: dict[OpenAIModel, str] = {OpenAIModel.GPT35: "cl100k_base", OpenAIModel.GPT4: "cl100k_base"}

```
(P.S.: I know you can get the tokenizer name from `tiktoken`, but there's a good reason not to! Can you think of the reason?)

If you know me, you probably know that I would love to turn this into a `dataclass`:

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class GPTConfig:
    length: int
    identifier: str
    tokenizer: str

```

We can now turn our enumeration into the following:

```python
from enum import Enum

class OpenAIModel(Enum):
    GPT35 = GPTConfig(length=16000, identifier="gpt-3.5-turbo", tokenizer="cl100k_base")
    GPT4 = GPTConfig(length=8192, identifier="gpt-4", tokenizer="cl100k_base")

```

And... This also works! We can now do things like:

```python
class OAIApiCaller:

    @classmethod
    def from_model(cls: type[OAIApiCaller], model: OpenAIModel) -> OAIApiCaller:
        # Do some useful stuff.
        # get the tokenizer, etc.
        return cls(...)

```

Real nice! The astute reader, however, will have noticed that we actually didn't use the `OpenAIModel` as a superclass in the enumeration definition. Recall that the superclass of the enumeration is used to convert the values to the appropriate type. Simplistically, something like this:

```python
for item in enumeration:
    item.value = enumeration.supertype(item.value)

```

So, if we would have chosen `OpenAIModel` as the supertype in our enumeration, we would, in fact, have done this.

```python
GPT35.value = GPTConfig(GPTConfig(length=16000, identifier="gpt-3.5-turbo", tokenizer="cl100k_base"))

```

This obviously doesn't work, and crashes using the really uninformative error:

```
TypeError: GPTConfig.__init__() missing 2 required positional arguments: 'model_identifier' and 'model_tokenizer'
```

This threw me for a loop, but in hindsight is quite obvious: the `GPTConfig` we assigned as a value to the enumeration member is used as the first argument in the initializer of `GPTConfig`, which doesn't work. 

A really ugly workaround would be to just pass tuples, which corresponds to initializing using `*args`. This is ugly, don't do that:

```python
from enum import Enum
     
    class OpenAIModel(GPTConfig, Enum):
        GPT35 = (16000, "gpt-3.5-turbo", "cl100k_base")
        GPT4 = (8192, "gpt-4", "cl100k_base")

OpenAIModel.GPT4
OpenAIModel(length=8192, identifier='gpt-4', tokenizer='cl100k_base')
```

The real way to tackle this is by overriding `__new__` and `__init__`, although I really question whether this is actually not stretching it beyond the realm of usability and into the realm of "correctness for correctness' sake". Let's dive into how this works! (Note: please strap in, this is going to be ugly.)

```python
from enum import Enum

class OpenAIModel(GPTConfig, Enum):

    def __new__(cls, *args):
        obj = object.__new__(cls)
        # Here, we assign the GPTConfig to the object
        obj._value_ = args[0]

        return obj

    def __init__(self, config: GPTConfig) -> None:
        self.tokenizer = config.tokenizer
        self.identifier = config.identifier
        self.tokenizer = config.tokenizer
        # Or, although a bit more opaque, you could iterate over every field using `__getattr__` or something. 
        # Please don't 🙏🙏🙏
    
    GPT35 = GPTConfig(length=16000, identifier="gpt-3.5-turbo", tokenizer="cl100k_base")
    GPT4 = GPTConfig(length=8192, identifier="gpt-4", tokenizer="cl100k_base")

```

What is happening here is that in `__new__`, we first create the object itself, and assign the `GPTConfig` itself as a `_value_`, which is a special variable used in the internal enum machinery. Afterwards, this `_value_`, is passed to the initializer of the `OpenAIModel` class, which can then be used to assign the correct fields.

And, this works! We can now directly do stuff like:

```python
model = OpenAIModel.GPT35
print(model.model_length)
# 8192

sorted(OpenAIModel, key=lambda x: x.model_length, reverse=True)
isinstance(OpenAIModel, GPTConfig)
# True

```

And also pass the enumeration members directly to functions that want to receive a `GPTConfig`. Ultimately, though, I am quite conflicted about this usage pattern. Few Python programmers seem to know that `__new__` exists, and instead think that `__init__` is the constructor. Coupled with the fact that making changes to `GPTConfig` also necessitates making changes to the `OpenAIModel` initializer makes me hesitant to recommend this option in practice. Ultimately, though, it might be the most correct option. Remember: code isn't just written for you or future you, but also other people, who, far down the line, can wield the power of `git blame` and curse you, even if it ended up being the most correct option.

Phew! That was a wrap again! I really enjoyed digging into how complicated such a small thing as an enumeration can be, and how "correctness" isn't necessarily better than just stretching definitions a tiny bit.